Current size of p_tab: 0x15 (21) bytes

# Handling multiple processes

## The problem

The NES doesn't have any kind of respectable external storage available to it.
The FDS (Famicom Disk System) provides 64K per disk-side of storage, but it
also needs a bunch of special hardware and a BIOS ROM to make it work, so it
can't be made to work with MMC5.  Even if it could, the 128K of storage provided
by a single disk isn't any better than the 128K of WRAM potentially provided by
the MMC5.

## Current WIP solution

### RAM

Use the 16 8K pages of WRAM as the entire working address space for each
process.  This leaves us with a maximum of 15 potential processes, since we need
one page for the kernel.  Realistically, we want to take advantage of the
battery-backing on the lower half of the WRAM for some R/W filesystem space, so
I'm currently thinking that I'll divide this in half:  The first 8 pages will be
an R/W filesystem, and the second 8 pages will be the kernel and 7 userspace
processes.

This solution is still just theoretical.  For now, I'm just not going to
implement swapping and get a single userspace process working.

### ROM

#### Layout

Code for each userspace process will live in one PRG ROM bank.  The kernel will
page in the appropriate process, and its RAM page, before jumping into the
userspace process.

#### What does this mean for the filesystem?

For now we need to have a read-only, program-only filesystem.  The FS metadata
will be a super-simple table, mapping a 16-character program name to a 1-byte
page number.  For now we'll just bake this into the kernel to get something
working.

## A real solution?

There is apparently some level of support for battery-backed CHR-RAM in FCEUX,
and we can theoretically page 4M of data in CHR-RAM.  Only 2M is battery-backed
(non-volatile), but this is more non-volatile storage than we have available
elsewhere.

I'm going to use the CHR-RAM like a disk, where a regular UZI filesystem will
live in the battery-backed portion.  This will require a properly formatted
filesystem in the uzi.nes .sav file, but that's trivial to cook up.  If I use
PRG-RAM for the 8000-BFFF page and load programs from CHR-RAM as needed, this
will allow me to more-or-less port UZI as it originally existed, but our "disk"
will actually be NVRAM accessed through the PPU.
